
1. Genome Inform. 2010;24:139-53.

Robust gene network analysis reveals alteration of the STAT5a network as a
hallmark of prostate cancer.

Reddy A(1), Huang CC, Liu H, Delisi C, Nevalainen MT, Szalma S, Bhanot G.

Author information: 
(1)BioMaPS Institute, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
anupamar@gmail.com.

We develop a general method to identify gene networks from pair-wise correlations
between genes in a microarray data set and apply it to a public prostate cancer
gene expression data from 69 primary prostate tumors. We define the degree of a
node as the number of genes significantly associated with the node and identify
hub genes as those with the highest degree. The correlation network was pruned
using transcription factor binding information in VisANT (http://visant.bu.edu/) 
as a biological filter. The reliability of hub genes was determined using a
strict permutation test. Separate networks for normal prostate samples, and
prostate cancer samples from African Americans (AA) and European Americans (EA)
were generated and compared. We found that the same hubs control disease
progression in AA and EA networks. Combining AA and EA samples, we generated
networks for low low (<7) and high (≥7) Gleason grade tumors. A comparison of
their major hubs with those of the network for normal samples identified two
types of changes associated with disease: (i) Some hub genes increased their
degree in the tumor network compared to their degree in the normal network,
suggesting that these genes are associated with gain of regulatory control in
cancer (e.g. possible turning on of oncogenes). (ii) Some hubs reduced their
degree in the tumor network compared to their degree in the normal network,
suggesting that these genes are associated with loss of regulatory control in
cancer (e.g. possible loss of tumor suppressor genes). A striking result was that
for both AA and EA tumor samples, STAT5a, CEBPB and EGR1 are major hubs that gain
neighbors compared to the normal prostate network. Conversely, HIF-lα is a major 
hub that loses connections in the prostate cancer network compared to the normal 
prostate network. We also find that the degree of these hubs changes
progressively from normal to low grade to high grade disease, suggesting that
these hubs are master regulators of prostate cancer and marks disease
progression. STAT5a was identified as a central hub, with ~120 neighbors in the
prostate cancer network and only 81 neighbors in the normal prostate network. Of 
the 120 neighbors of STAT5a, 57 are known cancer related genes, known to be
involved in functional pathways associated with tumorigenesis. Our method is
general and can easily be extended to identify and study networks associated with
any two phenotypes.


PMCID: PMC6035043
PMID: 22081596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

