
1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1997;407:41-53.

Involvement of the multiple tumor suppressor genes and 12-lipoxygenase in human
prostate cancer. Therapeutic implications.

Gao X(1), Porter AT, Honn KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, Michigan 48202, USA.

We performed a detailed and comprehensive study of the involvement of tumor
suppressor genes in human prostate cancer. We utilized primers flanking either
the restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) or variable number of tandem 
repeat [VNTR; microsatellite or simple repeat site (SRS)] polymorphic sites to
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplify the genomic DNA and detect loss of
heterozygosity of the target genes. Quantitative reverse transcription (RT)-PCR
was performed to measure the mRNA expression levels and PCR/single strand
conformational polymorphism (SSCP) and DNA sequencing carried out to detect
mutation of the tumor suppressor genes. We found that multiple tumor suppressor
genes (e.g., p53, DCC, APC, MCC, BRCA1, and WAF1/CIP1) were inactivated at
different frequencies via various mechanisms [e.g., loss of heterozygosity (LOH),
loss of expression (LOE), mutation, and inactivation by cellular binding
protein]. Several important and novel findings are as following: LOH and LOE of
the DCC gene, LOH, LOE, and possible mutation of the APC/MCC genes, LOH of the
BRCA1 locus, and mutation of the WAF1/CIP1 gene. For p53 tumor suppressor gene
alone, multiple inactivation mechanisms (i.e., LOH, LOE, mutation, and
amplification of the cellular inactivating protein MDM2) were identified. A
possible involvement of genomic instability or mutator phenotype in human
prostate cancer was investigated by microsatellite typing using PCR. A high
frequency of microsatellite instability was detected and the microsatellite
instability found to correlate with advanced stage and poor differentiation of
prostate cancer, suggesting that genes functioning in DNA mismatch repair or
general stabilization of the genome may be involved in prostate cancer. The
results obtained in this study suggested that multiple tumor suppressor genes
(both known and unknown genes) may share the role in prostate cancer; a pattern
which has been found in a number of human malignancies such as cancers of the
esophagus, colon and breast. In fact, we performed deletion studies aimed at
localizing potential tumor suppressor loci on various chromosomal regions. A
number of chromosomal regions (i.e., 6p12-24 and 17q21) were found to potentially
harbor unidentified tumor suppressor genes. Detailed deletion mapping has
localized the potential tumor suppressor loci to a < 2 Mb region centromeric to
the BRCA1 gene on chromosome 17q. In addition, we identified a number of novel
mechanisms of tumor suppressor gene inactivation, in prostate cancer such as loss
of mRNA expression of the DCC, APC, MCC and p53 gene, and mutator phenotype. And 
for the very first time, we identified somatic mutations of the WAF1/CIP1 gene in
primary human malignancy-human prostate cancer. This finding provides the first
evidence in primary tumor that the WAF1/CIP1 gene may be a tumor suppressor gene 
and may be involved in prostate cancer. We identified 12-lipoxygenase (12-LOX) as
a potential prognostic marker for human prostate cancer. mRNA expression levels
of the 12-LOX gene was measured by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR) and semi-quantitative in situ hybridization (ISH) in 122 
pairs of matched normal and tumor tissues from prostate cancer patients. We found
that 12-LOX expression levels were elevated in approximately half of the patients
analyzed and the 12-LOX elevation correlates with advanced stage, poor
differentiation, and surgical margin positivity. Our data suggest that 12-LOX may
serve as a correlative marker for a more aggressive phenotype of prostate cancer 
and therefore for poor prognosis. We are currently refining our assays for
possible clinical applicability. Since not all patients with loss of expression
of the DCC gene showed LOH of the DCC locus, there must be other mechanism(s)
responsible for loss of expression of the DCC gene. When we analyzed the
relationship between DCC loss of expression and 12-LOX elevation in prostate
cancer pati

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4899-1813-0_7 
PMID: 9321930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

