
1. Front Oncol. 2019 Apr 25;9:323. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00323. eCollection 2019.

Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy Alters Neuropilin-1, PlGF, and SNAI1 Expression Levels
and Predicts Breast Cancer Patients Response.

Al-Zeheimi N(1), Naik A(2), Bakheit CS(3), Al Riyami M(4), Al Ajarrah A(5), Al
Badi S(4), Al Baimani K(6), Malik K(7), Al Habsi Z(5), Al Moundhri MS(6), Adham
SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Science, Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat,
Oman.
(2)Qatar Biomedical Research Institute, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha,
Qatar.
(3)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat,
Oman.
(4)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Sultan Qaboos University,
Muscat, Oman.
(5)Department of Surgery, Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, Muscat, Oman.
(6)Medical Oncology Unit, Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, Sultan
Qaboos University Hospital, Muscat, Oman.
(7)Department of Surgery, Wrexham Maelor Hospital, Wrexham, United Kingdom.

Circulating proteins hold a potential benefit as biomarkers for precision
medicine. Previously, we showed that systemic levels of neuropilin-1 (NRP-1) and 
its associated molecules correlated with poor-prognosis breast cancer. To further
identify the role of NRP-1 and its interacting molecules in correspondence with
patients' response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC), we conducted a comparative 
study on blood and tissue samples collected from a cohort of locally advanced
breast cancer patients, before and after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC). From a
panel of tested proteins and genes, we found that the levels of plasma NRP-1,
placenta growth factor (PlGF) and immune cell expression of the transcription
factor SNAI1 before and after NAC were significantly different. Paired t-test
analysis of 22 locally advanced breast cancer patients showed that plasma NRP-1
levels were increased significantly (p = 0.018) post-NAC in patients with
pathological partial response (pPR). Kaplan-Meier analysis indicated that
patients who received NAC cycles and their excised tumors remained with high
levels of NRP-1 had a lower overall survival compared with patients whose tissue 
NRP-1 decreased post-NAC (log-rank p = 0.049). In vitro validation of the former 
result showed an increase in the secreted and cellular NRP-1 levels in resistant 
MDA-MB-231 cells to the most common NAC regimen
Adriyamicin/cyclophosphamide+Paclitaxel (AC+PAC). In addition, NRP-1 knockdown in
MDA-MB-231 cells sensitized the cells to AC and more profoundly to PAC treatment 
and the cells sensitivity was proportional to the expressed levels of NRP-1.
Unlike NRP-1, circulating PlGF was significantly increased (p = 0.014) in
patients with a pathological complete response (pCR). SNAI1 expression in immune 
cells showed a significant increase (p = 0.018) in patients with pCR, consistent 
with its posited protective role. We conclude that increased plasma and tissue
NRP-1 post-NAC correlate with pPR and shorter overall survival, respectively.
These observations support the need to consider anti-NRP-1 as a potential
targeted therapy for breast cancer patients who are identified with high NRP-1
levels. Meanwhile, the increase in both PlGF and SNAI1 in pCR patients
potentially suggests their antitumorigenic role in breast cancer that paves the
way for further mechanistic investigation to validate their role as potential
predictive markers for pCR in breast cancer.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00323 
PMCID: PMC6494932
PMID: 31106153 

