
1. Mil Med. 2019 Jul 23. pii: usz177. doi: 10.1093/milmed/usz177. [Epub ahead of
print]

Preliminary Evidence for a Hormetic Effect on DNA Nucleotide Excision Repair in
Veterans with Gulf War Illness.

Latimer JJ(1)(2), Alhamed A(1)(2), Sveiven S(2), Almutairy A(1)(2), Klimas
NG(3)(4), Abreu M(3), Sullivan K(5), Grant SG(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nova Southeastern University, 3200
South University Drive, Fort Lauderdale, FL.
(2)South University Drive, AutoNation Institute for Breast Cancer Research, 3321,
Fort Lauderdale, FL.
(3)Department of Clinical Immunology, Nova Southeastern University, 3200 South
University Drive, Fort Lauderdale, FL.
(4)Department of Medicine, Miami VA Healthcare System, 1201 NW 16th St, Miami,
FL.
(5)Department of Environmental Health, Boston University School of Public Health,
715 Albany St, Boston, MA.
(6)Department of Public Health, Nova Southeastern University, 3200 South
University Drive, Fort Lauderdale, FL.

INTRODUCTION: Veterans of the 1991 Gulf War were potentially exposed to a mixture
of stress, chemicals and radiation that may have contributed to the persistent
symptoms of Gulf War Illness (GWI). The genotoxic effects of some of these
exposures are mediated by the DNA nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway. We
hypothesized that individuals with relatively low DNA repair capacity would
suffer greater damage from cumulative genotoxic exposures, some of which would
persist, causing ongoing problems.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Blood samples were obtained from symptomatic Gulf War
veterans and age-matched controls. The unscheduled DNA synthesis assay, a
functional measurement of NER capacity, was performed on cultured lymphocytes,
and lymphocyte mRNA was extracted and analyzed by sequencing.
RESULTS: Despite our hypothesis that GWI would be associated with DNA repair
deficiency, NER capacity in lymphocytes from affected GWI veterans actually
exhibited a significantly elevated level of DNA repair (p = 0.016). Both total
gene expression and NER gene expression successfully differentiated individuals
with GWI from unaffected controls. The observed functional increase in DNA repair
capacity was accompanied by an overexpression of genes in the NER pathway, as
determined by RNA sequencing analysis.
CONCLUSION: We suggest that the observed elevations in DNA repair capacity and
NER gene expression are indicative of a "hormetic," i.e., induced or adaptive
protective response to battlefield exposures. Normally such effects are
short-term, but in these individuals this response has resulted in a long-term
metabolic shift that may also be responsible for the persistent symptoms of GWI.

© Association of Military Surgeons of the United States 2019.

DOI: 10.1093/milmed/usz177 
PMID: 31334811 

