
1. Vopr Onkol. 2013;59(3):334-40.

[Correlation of metastasis-free survival in patients with breast cancer and
changes in the direction of expression of multidrug resistance genes during
neoadjuvant chemotherapy].

[Article in Russian]

Litviakov NV, Garbukov EIu, Slonimskaia EM, Tsyganov MM, Denisov EV, Vtorushin
SV, Khristenko KIu, Zav'ialova MV, Cherdyntseva NV.

Previously, we showed the association of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) response 
with changing the expression vector (increase or decrease) of multidrug
resistance genes (MDR) in breast tumors during chemotherapy. The aim of the
present study was to evaluate the relation between changes in the expression
vector of MDR genes and distant metastasis-free survival. Patients (n = 120) with
breast cancer (T1-4N0-3M0) treated by 2-4 cycles of NAC (CAX, FAC, and taxane
regimes) and 4 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy (FAC) were included. TaqMan-based 
quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to estimate the
expression of the following MDR genes: ABCB1, ABCC1, ABCC2, ABCC5, ABCG1, ABCG2, 
GSTP1, and MVP--in biopsies before NAC and in tumor samples after chemotherapy.
Comparing the corresponding expression levels allowed us to identify the vector
of expression change during NAC. The results showed that 5-year distant
metastasis-free survival was 73-78% in patients with a decrease in ABCB1, ABCC2, 
and ABCG1 expression. The up-regulation of these genes during NAC was related to 
a significant decrease (up to 50-55%) in metastasis-free survival (Kaplan-Meier
analysis: log-rank p value = 0.006-0.03). The association of changing the
expression vector of MDR genes with metastasis-free survival did not depend on
tumor size, lymph node involvement, histological form, receptor status, molecular
subtype, and others clinicopathological parameters of breast cancer. The obtained
data suggest that changing the expression vector of MDR genes in breast tumors
during NAC may be used as a new potential prognostic marker of breast cancer. An 
increase in tumor expression of ABCB1, ABCC2, and ABCG1 during chemotherapy is a 
factor of poor prognosis, whereas down-regulation of these genes--a favorable
prognostic marker.


PMID: 23909034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

